hello Dan here from how to mechatronics
calm and in this video we will learn how
to build an Arduino CNC foam cutting
machine
[Music]
this is a typical DIY CNC machine
because it's made out of simple and
cheap materials some 3d printed parts
and it has an Arduino as a controller
instead of bits or lasers the main tool
of this machine is a hot wire or a
special type of resistance wire which
gets really hot when current flows
straight the hot wire melts or vaporizes
the phone when passing through it and so
we can precisely and easily get any
shape we want
I said easily because building a CNC
machine is actually not that hard if you
are a beginner and thinking about
building your first DIY CNC machine just
stay tuned because I will explain how
everything works I will show you the
entire process of building it starting
from designing the machine connecting
the electronics components programming
the Arduino and also explain how to
prepare your shapes make G codes and
control the Machine using free
open-source programs
so let's dive into it before we start I
would like to give a shout out to jlc
PCBs for sponsoring this video
jlc PCB is a manufacturer of high
quality PCBs which are used in many
industries for prototyping as well as
DIY projects once you have your PCB
design ready simply upload the Gerber
file review your PCB in the Gerber
viewer select the properties that you
want and order your PCB at a reasonable
price if it's your first order from jlc
PCB you can get up to 5 PCBs for only $2
to begin with here's the 3d model of
this machine the base construction is
made out of 20 by 20 millimeters t-slot
aluminum profiles I chose these profiles
because they are easy to use we don't
have to drill any holes or something
when assembling and plus they are
reusable
we can easily disassembled and use them
for other projects the motion of each
axis is achieved by using linear
bearings sliding on a 10 millimeter
smooth rods I use two rods for each axis
the sliding blocks might look a bit
weird but they are designed in a way
that they can be easily treated printed
as a single part while having multiple
functions
so for example the ex sliding block
accommodates the two linear bearings
it holds the y-axis rod it holds the
pulley for the y-axis belt as well as it
has handles for attaching the x axis
belt for driving the sliding blocks we
are using NEMA 17 stepper motors using a
shaft coupler a simple threaded rod two
pulleys and two belts we can evenly
drive the two sliding blocks on each
rail at the same time here we can also
notice that we have a third stepper
motor which enables the machine to make
2.5 D or 3d shapes and we will explain
how that works a bit later in the video
overall in terms of construction and
rigidity the design is probably not that
good but my point here was to make a
functional machine with minimum parts
possible and still be able to get the
job done nevertheless you can find and
download this 3d model as well as the
STL files which are used for 3d printing
on the website article the link to it is
in the description of the video for 3d
printing the parts I used Mike reality
CR 10 3d printer which is actually a
really good 3d printer with a reasonable
price there is also a link to this 3d
printer in the description in case you
want to check it out
note that some of the 3d printed parts
need a bit of post-processing or the
supporting material should be removed
before using in some cases I also hate
to use a rasp to remove the excess
material I guess due to a bad support
settings in the slicing software anyway
now I have all the materials ready so I
can start assembling the machine the
t-slot aluminum profiles ahead were 16
centimeters long so according to the 3d
model I cut each of them to size using a
metal handsaw then using the corner
brackets I assembled the base frame next
time installing the shaft clamps for the
x-axis
you see working with this load profiles
is so easy we just need some m5 bolts
and T slot nuts for attaching all kind
of things to them next time inserting
the shaft road through the clamps well
have inserted we also need to add the
x-axis sliding block
we just put the two bearings in it and
then insert them on the shaft now we can
slide in the shaft to the other side and
using a four bolt and a nut we can
tighten the shaft in place I repeated
this process for the other side too next
we need to install the y-axis for that
purpose first we need to insert the rods
into the x-axis sliding block place them
flush with the bottom of the part and
secure them using infrared sand bolts
then we can insert the y-axis sliding
blocks these sliding blocks use just a
single inner bearing on top of the
y-axis rods we need to attach the
mounting brackets which will connect the
two y-axis rods with a t-slot profile on
the top again we are using the same
method for securing them to the rods for
attaching the t-slot profiles to the
mounting brackets first I added three in
five bolts and t-slot nuts on them
then I just lit the profile in and
fasten the bolts so with this we hit the
main construction built and we can
freely move in both the X and the y-axis
next time attaching the legs on the base
frame again it's so simple to do that
using the T's load profiles once the
legs are secured I am going to insert
the first stepper motor for the x axis
in this case I am using twin team
leaders spacer nuts in order to distance
the motor shaft so I'm able to place a
belt pulley near the leg later on okay
so next I have a simple six millimeters
threaded rod which will drive the two
belts at the same time so first I cut it
to size place the bearing with six
millimeters inner diameter on the
opposite leg of the stepper motor and
pass the threaded rod through it then I
insert it and not for securing the rod
to the bearing and tooth tooth pulleys
for the belts for connecting the
threaded rod to the stepper motors I'd
really printed a shaft coupler with a
five millimeter hole on the stepper side
and six millimeter hole on the road side
the shaft coupler has slots for
inserting m3 nuts and then using m3
bolts or grub screws
we can easily secure it to the motor
shaft and a threaded rod next we need to
position the police in a line with the
sliding blocks handles and also secure
them with the grub screws on the
opposite side of the machine we can
insert the two idler pulleys I used some
aim five bolts and nuts for that purpose
okay so now we are ready to install the
gt2 belt for the x axis first I insert
it and secure the belt to the sliding
block with a help of a zip tie then I
pass the belt around the tooth pulley on
the other side around the idler pulley
cut it to the appropriate size and again
secure it to the other side of the
sliding block using a zip tie I repeated
this process for the other side as well
when securing the other side we must
make sure that the two sliding blocks
are on the same position on the x axis
for that purpose we can simply move them
to the end of the rails and so we can
tighten the belt and secure it with a
zip tie with this the x axis sliding
mechanism is done next with the same
method we will assemble the y axis
mechanism
[Music]
for securing the Bell to the sliding
block again we use zip ties here the
sliding block has only one handle and in
order to secure the belt first izip tied
one end of the bell then i stretch the
belt to be tied enough and then with
another zip tie I caught both ends of
the belt now I can just remove the
previous zip tie and cut off the excess
belt as mentioned earlier when securing
the belt on the other side we must make
sure that the two sliding blocks are on
the same position on the y axis with
this the y axis mechanism is also done
next I will attach one mortise load
profile across the x axis this profile
will serve for attaching the third
stepper motor to it as well as for
placing the foam pieces on it with the
third stepper motor we can make the 2.5
D or actually three-dimensional shapes
with this machine like for example the
chess piece okay so next we need to
install the resistance wire this wire
needs to be able to withstand high heat
while maintaining uniform temperature
across its length
that's usually a nichrome wire or a
stainless steel fishing wire which are
actually inexpensive and easy to get in
order to work properly the wire needs to
be tensioned between the two towers or
the sliding blocks and here's how I did
it I attached m5 bolts on both sliding
blocks and added some small extension
Springs to them then I simply attach the
wire to the springs attention the wire
as much as the springs allowed the wire
needs to be tensioned like this with
Springs because when it will get hot it
will extend its length and so the
springs will be able to compensate for
that next we can connect the resistance
fire with electrical wires we will use
the DC power so the polarity here
doesn't matter it's just important a
current to flow through the wire in
order to get hot here make sure your
electrical wire is thick enough in order
to support current rows of around 3 to 5
amps in my case I am using 22 gauge wire
but I would suggest 20 or 80
wire just for sure initially I attached
the electrical wire between the two nuts
and so the current could pass from the
coil to the resistance wire this
actually didn't work really well and I
will show you why in a minute I
conducted the wire to the handles of the
sliding block in order to stay neat and
away from the hot wire next time
installing the CNC machine n stops or
limit switches these micro limit
switches have three connections ground
normally open and normally closed
connection initially I connected them to
normally open connection but after
conducting some tests I switched to
normally closed connection because in
that way the machine works more stable
the problem is the electrical noise
generated while the CNC machine works
which falsely triggers the switches like
they are pressed and causes the machine
to stop working there are several
solutions for this problem but more on
that on the website article next we can
connect the cables to the stepper motors
and then see how to connect all the
electronic components of course the
brain of the CNC machine is on a Reno
board along with it we also need an
Arduino CNC shield 3a 4988 stepper
drivers and a DC to DC converter for
controlling the temperature of the hot
wire
I really printed a stand for the
electronics components which I secured
it to one side of the t-slot profile
using impulse first I secured the
Arduino board to the stand and then
inserted da Arduino CNC short on top of
it next we need to select the resolution
at which the stepper driver will drive
the motors using some jumpers in my case
I chose 16 step resolution by adding
three jumpers to each driver and so the
steppers will have smoother movements
when placing the drivers make sure their
orientation is correct the small
potentiometers can be an indicator for
that which should be oriented to the
bottom side of the shield I continued
with securing the DC converter in place
then I connected the three stepper
motors to the Arduino shield as well as
the two limit switches to the X plus and
y plus and stop pins for powering the
machine I will use 12 volts 6 amps DC
power supply the Arduino syncytial can
actually work from 12 to 36 volts and
also the particular DC converter that I
use can work with the same voltages on
the input of the DC converter I added a
switch so I can turn on and off the hot
wire separately on the output of the DC
converter I simply connected the two
wires from the two ends of the
resistance wire finally we can connect
and power the Arduino to the USB port
and power the Arduino since issued and
stepper motors through the DC power plug
here's a circuit diagram of how
everything needs to be connected alright
now it's time to test the machine
whether it works properly and I will
start with the hot wire you can see here
I have 0 volts at the DC converter input
and once I turn on the switch I get 12
volts on the input then on the output of
the DC converter again I have 0 volts
but as we start turning the
potentiometer we can adjust the output
voltage from 0 to 12 volts and so the
current flow through the hot wire and
ultimately its temperature the best way
to test at what voltage you should set
the output of the DC converter is by
trying to cut through some foam pieces
the hot wire should be able to cut
through the foam without much resistance
and bending however after the initial
testing you can see what happened to my
hot wire it extended due to the heat and
the springs which should have compensate
for that didn't do their job actually
the springs lost their functionality due
to overheating because with this
configuration the current was flowing
through them as well so I replaced the
old springs with new ones and now I
bypass them by connecting the electrical
wires directly to the resistance wire
with the help of some elevator clamps
okay so next we need to give life to
this machine and actually make it a real
CNC machine for that purpose we need to
upload a firmware to the Arduino which
Pancho's the motion of the machine the
most popular choice for DIY CNC machines
is the grbl or the herbal firmware it's
open-source and we can freely download
it from github com once we download it
as a zip file we can extract it copy the
herbal folder and past it into the
Arduino library directory then we can
open the arduino ide and from file
examples herbal choose the herbal upload
example now we need to select the
arduino board that we are using arduino
uno in this case select the comfort to
which our arduino is connected and
finally upload this sketch to the
arduino once uploaded now the arduino
knows how to read g codes and how to
control the machine according to them
next we need some kind of interface or a
controller which will communicate and
tell the arduino what to do again i am
choosing an open-source program for that
purpose and that's the universal g code
center i downloaded the 2.0 platform
version to run the program we need to
extract the zip file go to the bin
folder and open any of the executable
UGS platform files this is actually a
java program so in order to run the
program first we need to install Java
Runtime environment we can also download
this for free from its official website
so once we open the universal G code
sender program first we need to run the
setup wizard in order to configure the
machine here we just need to select the
proper port and connect the program to
the arduino once the connection is
established we can check the direction
of moving of the motors by clicking the
buttons I chose the positive movements
to go from home position where the
limits features are located to the other
side next we need to calibrate the steps
of the motors in order to achieve
correct and accurate movements as we
select at 16 step resolution on the
drivers and the motors have 200 physical
steps that
it will take 3,200 steps in order the
motor to make full 360 degrees movement
now depending on the transmission type
or in this case the size of the pulleys
we need to calculate the number of steps
the motors needs to do so the machine
moves 1 millimeter the default value
here is set to 200 steps per millimeter
so once we click one of these move
buttons the motor will make 250 steps
now in reality using a ruler we measure
the actual movement of the machine and
we enter that number here in the program
according to this the program will
calculate and tell us what value we
should change and update the steps per
millimeter parameter in my case that's
83 steps per millimeter as for the z
axis I set it to 400 steps per
millimeter or that means a value of 1
limiter for the z axis
we'll make a rotation of 45 degrees next
we need to check whether the limit
switches work properly depending whether
we have connected them normally open or
normally closed we can also invert them
here just like I said before normally
closed connection work better for me
anyway here we need to notice that we
need to turn off the z axis limit switch
as we don't have one in our machine if
we don't turn it off we won't be able to
home the machine in order to do that we
need to go to the herbal folder in the
yard we know library and edit the config
dot H file here we need to find the
humming cycle lines and comment the
default set for 3 axis CNC machine and
uncomment the setup for two axis machine
now we need to save the file and reload
the Gerber upload example to the arduino
know that you should probably restart
the programs again in order the changes
to be applied to the programs alright so
next we can try to home the machine
using the try homing button when clicked
the machine should start moving toward
the x limit switch and once pressed it
will start moving the y axis if needed
we can change the limit switches
directions at the end of the setup
wizard we can set the soft limits which
actually limit the distance the machine
can travel in each direction in my case
dates 45 by 45 centimeters okay so now
the program is ready to work
before each use you should always home
the machine and then you can do anything
you want
first I would suggest to play around and
test the job controller or manually move
the machine around also at this point
you should try to cut some foam pieces
in order to find out what feed rate or
speed of movement will be most suitable
for you so you should play around with
both the hot wire temperature and the
feed rate in order to figure out what
will get you the most clean and precise
cuts on your foam pieces finally what's
left in this video is to take a look how
to prepare the drawings so the CNC
machine can make shapes out of them for
that purpose we need a vector graphics
software and again I chose an
open-source one and that's Inkscape you
can download it from its official web
site for free I will show you two
examples how to prepare a jig code for a
CNC machine using Inkscape so first we
should set the page size to the size of
our working area and that's 45 by 45
centimeters for the first example I
downloaded an image of the yard we know
logo and import it into the program
using the trace bitmap function first we
need to convert the image to a vector
format now in order to be able to cut
the shape with the hot wire we need to
make the shape to be a continuous pad
that's because the hot bar is always
present in the working area
it cannot be raised like for example a
bit or turned off in case of a laser
while traveling from one to the other
letter or shape so therefore using
simple rectangles I connected all
separate pieces together we do that by
selecting the pieces and then use the
union function on the other hand the
inner closed loops need to be open and
we can do that using the difference
function so once we have our drawing
ready we can use the g-code tools
extension to generate the g-code first
we need to generate the orientation
points
then we can scale our model to the
desired size next we need to go to the
tools library and with this define the
tool that we are using for the CNC
machine we can select a cylinder as the
wire obviously has a cylindrical shape
here we can change the parameters like
the diameter of the tool I seal it to
one millimeter as well as the feed rate
the other parameters are not important
at this time finally now we can generate
the g-code for this shape using the path
to g code function the g code is simply
a set of instruction that the herbal or
the Arduino can understand and according
to them drive the stepper motor so now
we can open the g code in the universal
decode center program and should a
visualizer window we can see the path
that the machine should go through
however we can notice here the yellow
lights which represent an empty travel
or travel through air in case of using
bit or a laser as mentioned earlier in
this case the Hotwire cannot move on
these travels because the buyer would
cut through the material and ruin the
shape here we can actually notice that
we didn't have a single pad for the
entire shape because we forgot to open
the closed areas inside the logo so now
we can simply go back to the drawing
make these closed areas open and then
generate the J code again one more thing
to mention that it's good idea to select
your own starting point we can do that
by double-clicking the shape select a
node and then select break pad at
selected node now if we open the new g
code we can see that the pad starts from
the letter a goes through the whole
shape and ends back at the later a for
securing the foam pieces to the CNC
machine i made this simple holders which
have entry bolts that penetrate the foam
and hold it in place
okay so now I will show you one more
example of how to make a
three-dimensional shape we will make a
square pillar shape which needs to be
cut on four sides ninety degrees from
each other I got the pillar shape with
the trace bitmap method as shown earlier
now we can draw a simple rectangle as
big as the pillar and we will subtract
the pillar from the rectangle we will
delete one of the sides as we need only
one profile part of the pillar so this
is the actual pad that the CNC machine
should make and after each passing we
need to rotate the third stepper motor
90 degrees in order to do that when
creating the orientation point we need
to set the z-depth to minus 8
millimeters then in the tools parameters
we need to set the depth step to a value
of 2 millimeters now after generating
the g-code we can open it in the g-code
Center and we can see that the machine
will do 4 passes on the same pad at 2
millimeters depth difference in case of
a CNC router that would mean that each
time the bit will get 2 millimeters
deeper to cut the material but here as
shown earlier we set the z-axis to
rotate 45 degrees with each millimeter
or 90 degrees for 2 millimeters this
temper motor travel anyway here we also
need to modify the g-code a little bit
by the folder generated g-code after
each passing moves the z-axis to a value
of 1 millimeter which in case of a CNC
router it means that it raises the bit
when an empty travel is performed
actually we could leave the g-code
unmodified but it will make unnecessary
movements of the z-axis or rotate the
foam piece for no reason therefore after
each iteration of the code we just have
to modify the z-axis value to stay at
the same place without moving back to
the value of 1 millimeter for mounting
the foam piece for making the 3d shape
we use this platform which contains m3
bolts that gets tucked into the foam
piece and they hold it while it's being
shaped before running the g-code we need
to manually bring the hot wire near the
foam piece the
distance from the center to the hot wire
should be as much as we want our shape
to be deep in case we want the exact
dimension like in the drawing we need to
measure the distance from the origin to
the center of the shape in the drawing
then we need to click the reset zero
button in the controller in order to
tell the program that it should start
from here instead of the home position
and that's it now we just have to click
the play button and the CNC machine will
make the 3d shape so that's pretty much
everything for this tutorial I hope the
explanation was clear enough and that
you will be able to make your own CNC
machine of course for more details full
list of components needed for this
project 3d model files and links to all
software that I use you can check the
website article also feel free to ask
any question related to this project in
the comment section both on the website
article and here on youtube thanks for
watching and see you in the next one